-*-Mode: markdown;-*-

$Id$

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
MemGaze Issues
=============================================================================

* Build problem in xlib: See 'Spack and build problems' in [[xlib/README.md]]


* The binary generated by `memgaze-inst` (instrumented binary) will
  show limited or no source line information using standard tools such
  as objdump. However, the mapping can be read by hpcstruct.
  
  For more, see DynInst note (1) in `xlib/README.md`.


* Bug: Occasionally, `memgaze-inst` looses track of the mapping between
  an instrumented and original memory reference instruction. This
  causes a) source-code mapping's line numbers to be off; and b) (more
  important) `memgaze-inst` looses track of a load's class.

  The problem is two bugs in DynInst. Occasionally, for a reason we do
  not understand, DynInst lies about its mapping information. That is,
  DynInst sometimes generates spill code --- another bug --- _after_
  its relocation is allegedly complete and the mapping is generated.
  
  These bugs occur only for some binaries. When they occur for a
  binary, they only occur for a few loads.
  
  For more, see DynInst note (2) in `xlib/README.md
  `
  
* Bug: Occasionally, `memgaze-inst` may not instrument portions of an
  extremely complex non-contiguous function. In the notes history, see
  the details associated with "Limitation: `memgaze-inst` and
  non-contiguous functions."
  
  Workaround: Recompile the binary and disable hot-cold path
  optimization, e.g., in GCC use `-fno-reorder-blocks-and-partition`.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Directory Structure
=============================================================================

* bin-anlys: Static binary analysis and instrumentation

  - Contains code derived from MIAMI-NW. Uses DynInst.

  - Fast-footprint 'fine-grained footprint analysis' (ISPASS 20). This
    is function-level, footprint analysis combining (intraprocedural)
    static analysis, control-flow profiles (for loop execution
    counts), and memory-hit profiles.
  
  - Palm's task-based path cost analysis (critical path) for paths of
    basic blocks. Cost includes instruction pipeline latency and
    memory latency. Replaces IACA and extends its analysis.


* mem-trace: Trace or profile memory behavior

* mem-anlys: Analyze memory behavior from memory traces

  - footprint, execution interval tree

  - Palm coarse-grained footprint analysis
    palm-task: hpctoolkit run + fp analysis on database xml file


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Data formats
=============================================================================

* MemGaze's final trace format:

  `<insn-pc> <mem-addr> <cpu-id> <timestamp> <sample-id> <LoadModule-id>`

  - `<insn-pc>`:  instruction pointer of memory access (static, unrelocated)
  - `<mem-addr>`: memory data address (dynamic, run-time)
  - `<cpu-id>`:   core id executing instruction

  Note: In initial trace, a two-source load has two lines that are later converted to one line.


* MemCAMera trace format:

  `<insn-pc> <mem-addr> <cpu-id> <timestamp> [mem-addr2 cpu-id timestamp]`


* MemGaze's final `<binanlys file>`

  `<0:insn-pc> <1:access-class> <2:access-offset> <3:access-scale>`
  `<4:skipped-accesses> <5:symbol-offset> <6:symbol-name>`

  - <0:insn-pc>: (hex) instruction pointer of memory access *before* instrumentation, i.e., instruction pointer in original binary
  
  - <1:access-class>: (integer) access class: load class (0,1,2) or store (90)
 
  - <2:access-offset>: (hex) memory access offset <o> for an access with offsets. Consider the load: "load dest <- [src] + o", where the accessed access include <o>.
  
  - <3:access-scale>: (hex) memory access scale <k> for an access with scaling. Consider the load: "load dest <- [src1] + k [src2] + o", where the accessed access include <k>.

  - <4:skipped-accesses>: Number of skipped constant loads

  - <5:symbol-offset>: (hex) symbol offset (from section?)

  - <6:symbol-name>: (string) symbol (function) name
